Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we will have
a little introduction to something called the
tropical calculus which is an alternative way of
thinking about the algebra of sets or multi sets
it's a rather interesting relatively recent
innovation which goes under several different
names tropical calculus sometimes called the Max
Plus algebra sometimes minimax algebra and it has
its origins in control theory and the tropical
refers to the fact that to some connection
with Brazil now I'm not actually that confident
about the the history I think probably a number
of different people have discovered some of these
ideas sort of independently but maybe some of you
can inform us as to more details of what actually
happened in terms of the development of this
subject so the framework is we're thinking about
a number system which for us might be the natural
numbers the integers or the rational numbers
and we're looking at this number system from
the point of view of sort of the set theoretic
or data theoretic point of view where Union or
max and addition are the two main concepts we're
going to be focusing on so we have two numbers x
and y we can talk about their union which is just
the maximum of those two numbers and we can talk
about their sum in the usual fashion now these
two operations so if we ignore the multiplication
and the other operations for a second these two
operations together generates some interesting
kind of algebra and associated to them there's
sort of some secondary operations so if we have
Union we could also think perhaps in terms of the
intersection or the minimum of two numbers and the
sort of inverse operation to addition subtraction
and we've talked about how we can sort of think
about various properties these operations forming
something which we rather informally call it an
a realm now we could have a realm in the context
of natural numbers or also of integers or also of
rational numbers now what motivates the tropical
calculus is one particular law that holds in this
system which is this particular distributive law
that M plus n Union P equals m plus n Union M plus
P and I remind you that that means that if you
take m and you add the maximum of N and P but
that's the same as the maximum of M plus N or M
plus P it's kind of obvious right that you take
m and you take the bigger of these two and add it
to M that's the same thing as looking at M plus
N and M plus P those two sums individually and
taking the maximum of those now this distributive
law looks very much like a much more familiar
distributive law M times n plus P equals M times
n plus M times P that primary school students
learn when they're learning about basic arithmetic
so the parallel here is that the addition here is
sort of playing the role of the multiplication in
the usual setting and this Union operation is sort
of playing the role of the addition in the usual
setting as the parallel between these two types of
distributive laws that really motivates the idea
of the tropical calculus so we might say that
the basic idea of the tropical calculus is that
we're going to replace these operations of Union
and addition with addition and multiplication
respectively and then exploit our familiarity with
the usual algebra involving these two operations
so we're very familiar with algebra involving
addition and multiplication and we've just seen
that these two operations behave a lot like these
two at least with respect to the distributive law
so the idea is and we're working with these
two operations in the realm context what we
do is we just replace these two operations with
these ones and sort of pretend that we're doing
ordinary algebra or more precisely our familiarity
with ordinary algebra allows us to relatively
easily manipulate things here which then have
also some meaning in this context so to set
this up I'm going to introduce my own particular
way of doing this which is a sort of an attempt
to try to introduce this tropical calculus with a
minimal amount of new notation so I'm going to use
just ordinary addition and multiplication but to
distinguish one of these new interpretations from
the traditional one I'm going to put a capital
T in brackets to denote that this is a tropical
equation here so whenever we have an equation with
a T either before or after it then we're going to
interpret that equation in a tropical sense and
that means that we have to define very precisely
what the meaning of all the various tropical
equations are so an equation with a T behind
it has a new meaning that we are now going to
establish step by step for a number of different
kinds of different cases so our basic setup
is we're going to start with rational numbers
we could also in fact do this over the natural
numbers or the integers but the rational numbers
is probably the biggest domain that way we sort of
include the other ones all at the same time so x
y&z are rational numbers so let us define X plus
y equals Z tropicale okay that means that X Union
Y equals Z so here's an ordinary equation with an
ordinary meaning this is the usual Union that we
already are familiar with so this is saying that
the union of x and y is that or in other words at
them maximum of X and why is that okay so when we
have that connection between the three rational
numbers x y&z we're going to rewrite that this
way using the symbol plus X plus y equals Z with
a teeth all right so this plus sign in the context
of a T really means Union similarly x y equals Z
in the tropical context means that X plus y equals
Z all right so we're adopting the usual convention
that X Y means the same as x times y so here's
the operation of multiplication but it's now a
novel kind of multiplication it means that X plus
y equals Z in the usual sense so as a kind of a
consequence of that well as x times y equals n
means X plus y equals n then y equals x to the N
tropically is going to mean that Y actually equals
X plus X plus X plus X and so on n times it's just
multiplication and fold and since multiplication
is addition the meaning of this is that y equals
n times X in the usual sense that's ordinary
multiplication so ordinary multiplication because
there's no T there this is a T that means this has
to be interpreted in this tropical sense so for
example five plus seven equals seven as a tropical
equation and that's because the union of five and
seven is seven Union of course the same as max
the max of five and seven is seven so this is
the way we write that in the tropical sense five
times seven equals twelve in the tropical sense
because in the tropical sense this multiplication
really means ordinary addition ordinary addition
to five and seven is twelve so five times seven
equals twelve tropically and tropically three to
the four equals 12 because in tropical sense
multiplication is addition and so this three
to the four means really 3 plus 3 plus 3 plus
3 or in other words the usual 3 times 4 which
is 12 so these are certainly strange new kinds of
expressions new usages of the operations addition
and multiplication tropical kind of arithmetic
all right so now we have some properties of
these operations in this tropical context we
have for example associative laws both for
tropical addition and for tropical multiplication
and there's just the usual associative laws and
of course they really reflect the associative
laws of Union and addition in the ordinary sense
similarly we have commutative laws for this
tropical addition and tropical multiplication
which are just reflections of the commutative
laws for ordinary Union and ordinary addition
then we have these distributive laws which
are sort of the motivating well you know
laws that started this whole story that facts
x y plus z equals x times y plus x times Z and
the corresponding other one that's symmetrical
were arranged X plus y times Z equals x sub Z
plus y times Z and this kind of law this
tropical kind of distributive law is just
a way of writing the law that we had before
that we all wrote in ordinary terms as X plus
y unions n equals x plus why union X plus
Z we're just rewriting that law using these
new forms or interpretations of addition
and multiplication and now here are some
laws that are not familiar in the usual story so
in ordinary addition it's not true that X plus x
equals x but tropically this is all a very valid
law so X plus x equals x it's just a reflection of
the fact that X Union X is always X and this one
that's 0 times y is the same as Y times 0 is y
tropically so that's a reflection of the ordinary
fact that 0 plus y the same as Y plus 0 is y so
0 is usually the additive identity here it's sort
of a multiplicative identity this idempotent kind
of law is very important in applications because
first of all we have to remember that it's it's
valid so it's a difference between the algebra
here and the usual algebra that we're used to
and it's also important because it simplifies a
lot of things so if we have an expression that
has you know an XY term plus another XY term
well that XY plus XY is the same as XY that's
what this law is telling us so whenever we have
copies or duplicates of something added together
we can just basically collapse those things
so things simplify quite often dramatically
because of this unimportant law then we have
some other observations that X plus 0 equals
x tropically that happens precisely when X is
bigger than or equal to 0 in the usual sense
all right this is saying that the maximum of X
and 0 is X X is a number the Mac some of X and
0 is X it means that X is positive greater than
or equal to 0 and similarly if X plus 0 happens
to be 0 tropically that's telling us that the
max of X and 0 is 0 that means that X is less
than or equal to 0 so the order properties of a
number are reflected in this tropical setting by
these purely algebraic relations you can check
that X to the N to the M is the same as X to
the N M because after all X to the N really
just means n times X and if we replace that
with n times X to the M just again multiplying
by M so that's the same as just taking n times
M copies of X but now here this exponent nm is to
be interpreted in the usual sense so maybe that's
a little bit possibly confusing that the tropical
multiplication does not apply to exponents ok it
applies to the variables themselves but not
exponents ok so now we have idea of inverses
so multiplication in this tropical setting is
really ordinary addition an ordinary addition
has a nice kind of inverse and so the inverse
of ordinary addition is the negation and so that
negation then ends up playing the role of the
multiplicative inverse in the tropical setting
so we can write that y equals x minus 1 tropical
that means that Y times X should be 0 which is the
multiplicative identity it's like the thing that
plays the role of 1 in the tropical world and this
is telling us that y plus X ordinarily is 0 or
that y equals minus X so the relation y equals x
to the minus 1 or y equals x inverse or y equals
1 over X tropically is the same as saying that y
is just the negative x in the ordinary sense and
that allows us then to make sense of quotients
so x over y equals ed well that's the same as
saying that x times y inverse equals said and
to tropically that has the interpretation that
X minus y equals Z so x over y equals ed is the
same as X minus y equals ed this is the tropical
statement this is the ordinary statement it's a
little bit fun I think playing around with these
things so it's good to have some exercise for you
to to practice getting yourself in this mindset of
thinking differently about these fundamental very
familiar operations so I'm going to give you some
exercises for you to check and to just practice
so the first one is that show that x times ed
over Y times set is equal to XY in a tropical
setting so in other words that we are allowed to
cancel common factors from the numerator and the
denominator of a tropical expression just as we
ordinarily do in ordinary algebra so corresponding
to that show that the same kind of thing does
not happen or does not apply when we have an
additive expression so if we have the expression
X plus Z equals y plus sin tropically that from
that we are not able to deduce that x equals y
tropically in ordinary algebra you would just
subtract a Zed and get that x equals y but here
you're not allowed to do that you are allowed
to cancel the multiplicative factors but not the
additive ones so please convince yourself of that
another important thing that we want to get our
heads around is the the role of the intersection
the other operation so remind you that the
intersection of two numbers x and y can be
expressed in terms of the addition and the union
in terms of this fundamental relation here that
X intersect Y equals x plus y minus X Union Y and
from that we can deduce that this is the right way
of thinking about how to interpret intersection in
the tropical setting so it's Z equals X intersect
Y that's the same as Z equals x times y over X
plus y in a tropical setting so why is that well
because over here if we look at this equation
here we want to interpret this tropically okay
so if Z equals X intersect Y that means that this
is going to be Z so what is this thing if we want
to interpret this or rewrite this equation in a
tropical setting well the X plus y is replaced
with the x times y and the X Union Y is replaced
with the X plus y and this thing - this thing here
is interpreted as a quotient so it's this thing
tropically divided by this thing tropically so
the tropical formulation of this ordinary equation
is that Z equals XY over X plus y tropically so is
another exercise to show that this is equivalent
to the sort of harmonic mean condition you can
just sort of rewrite this as 1 over said equals 1
over X plus 1 over Y and you might like to so it
convinced yourself that if you look at it in the
right way this is obvious or should be obvious so
here are some more exercises that show you that
you can do algebra in this tropical setting so
show that x over y equals Z over W tropically
is equivalent to x times W equals y times Z
so you can cross multiply to clear fractions just
as you do in ordinary algebra similarly that you
can add fractions just as you do or an ordinary
algebra x over y plus set over w equals x times
W plus y times ed over Y times W tropically here
verify the identity that a plus B C over B plus
C equals a plus B times a plus C over a plus B
plus a plus C tropically and then here use this
identity to prove this other kind of distributive
law between the unions and intersections that a
union B intersect C equals a union B intersect a
union C and I hope you can see that they kind of
correspond this B intersect C that corresponds
to BC over B plus C we've seen that and here's a
union so that corresponds to a plus here's a an
intersection between this and this so a union B
corresponds to a plus B a union C corresponds
to 8% well that intersection for a correspond
so that's all hopefully it kind of makes sense
so this is a purely algebraic way of proving
this distributive law that's kind of interesting
I think that's what computer could because they're
just algebraically prove this in this tropical
setting proving this sort of algebraically in
the ordinary setting is not so easy because
our our algebra is not really set up to to
easily work with these things all right so now as
a sort of more weighty application let's consider
this following proposition this is actually an
example sort of an arithmetic 'el aspect of a very
fundamental and important formula in set theory
or in sort of data structure theory more generally
called inclusion and we'll talk a little bit more
about that in our next video so here what we're
saying is that for any rational numbers x y&z we
have a following relation that connects this union
with sums and differences involving intersections
so saying that X Union Y Union Zed and this means
the maximum of x y&z is X plus y plus Z minus
X intersect Y minus X intersect said minus y
intersect said plus X intersect Y intersect said
so for example if X happens to be 2 and Y is 5
and Z equals 3 then the left-hand side here is
2 Union 5 Union 3 that's the maximum of those 3
which is obviously 5 the right-hand side would be
2 plus 5 plus 3 - ok the meat of 2 and 5 the meat
of 2 & 3 the meat of 5 + 3 of the intersection
and then the addition of the intersection - its
X 5 intersect 3 so 2 plus 5 plus 3 is 10 the
intersection of these two is the minimum that's
minus 2 here there's another minus 2 here there's
a minus 3 and then we have to add the minimum of
these 3 which is 2 so altogether we get 10 minus
5 which is 5 does in fact equal the left-hand side
all right so if we wanted to prove this sort of
using our framework of the tropical calculus sort
of a fun thing to try to do one thing that we
might first do is to bring the negatives here
to the other side so that we just have additions
involved so we're going to rewrite this equation
star as star star where we have the union of all
three here and then plus X intersect Y plus X
intersect said plus y intersect said so we've
brought those three left side equals x plus y
plus Z plus the intersection X intersect Y to st.
cent so let's see if we can prove this tropically
so we want to just prove that this is an identity
like a plus B squared equals a squared plus 2 a B
plus B squared same kind of identity I'm going
to do it tropically as a preliminary to that
let's just get under control how to represent
this intersection of three things effectively
tropically so I remind you that X intersect Y
equals W that means or can be interpreted in a
tropical setting is saying that W equals x times y
over X plus y that's sort of the way intersection
looks like in this tropical framework ok so if
we have three things that we're intersecting we
can think about that as the intersection of
X with the intersection Y it's exit so it's
going to be x times and here is the Y intersect
zedd expression tropically why is that over y
plus set so x times that divided by x plus that
same quantity so this thing equals W is the same
as the tropical equation that this thing equals
telling you now one of the things we're allowed
to do with this kind of expression is multiply
top and bottom by the same quantity so we could
multiply top and bottom by y plus Z sort of to
clear the denominators that are naturally there
then we'll get XYZ in the numerator and after
we've multiplied by y plus said then we'll have
here in the denominator XY plus XZ plus Y Z so
we get this sort of nice symmetrical expression
that this intersection equals W or the tropical
side it means that W equals XYZ over XY plus xn
plus y Zenta that's not hard to see that this is
equivalent to 1 over W equals 1 over X plus 1 over
y plus 1 over Zeta to sort of take the inverses
of both sides there so now we have control over
the intersection of three things so let's have
a look if we improve that relation tropically
all right so here's the equation that we wanted
to establish we want to establish this identity
X Union Y Union Z plus X intersect Y plus X
intersect Z plus y intersecting said equals X
plus y plus Z plus X intersect Y intersect set
all right so we're going to take that equation
and rewrite it tropically so when I replace the
unions with additions and we're going to replace
the additions with multiplications and I'm going
to replace these intersections with these more
complicated expressions so X intersect Y gets
replaced with XY over X plus y similarly this
gets replaced with that that place with that the
X plus y plus Z gets replaced with X Y Zed and
this term here is that thing that we just had a
look at in the previous slide that's X Y Z over
X Y plus xn plus y Z and that has to multiply
this because there's an addition sign there so
we getting in this original thing here is X plus
y plus Z and they're going to multiply that by
this expression multiplied by this multiplied by
this that's equal to XYZ times this product here
so we have to establish this as an identity in the
tropical setting right so we look at it and we see
that there is a common factor of X Y Z squared
on both sides there's next why is that squared
there and these terms here gives us another X
Y Z squared now we can cancel them because we
multiply both sides by the inverse of X Y set
which always exists right it's even nicer than
the usual inverse usually you have to worry about
something being 0 because you're not allowed to
divide by 0 here there's no problem there's no
possibility of dividing by something not allowed
because even 0 is allowed to 0 sort of playing
the role of 1 here so we after we cancel those
X Y Zed Squared's which are common then we can
clear denominators okay so we're going to sort of
just something a over B equals C over D so we'll
just rewrite that as a times D equals B times C
so we're going to get this expression times the
denominator here we want to show that that's equal
to the denominator here times the numerator here
so this comes up there so this is the identity
that we need to realize and then we just do that
by expanding both sides so when you expand say
this left-hand side you're going to get x times X
Y so that's gonna be an x squared Y and then this
can be an x squared z and then there's an X Y Z
here is there and then there's a Y XY squared and
then an air YX set well that's the same as though
XYZ that we've already got so now we have two of
them but two of them is the same as one of them
because with the idempotent identity x plus x is
the same as x so x times y times z plus x times y
times n is still just x times y times n you never
get more than one of anything so after we expand
these terms then we see that we get two of these
six symmetrical terms plus X Y Z and then if you
look on the right-hand side what do you get when
you expand that you see that you get exactly the
same terms so this equals this is an identity in
the tropical world where we've crucially used the
idempotent law and so the original thing is a true
identity and we've proven this law of inclusion
exclusion at least in the context of rational
numbers still not serve at the level of sets but
in the context of rational numbers we've proven
this inclusion exclusion sort of identity this is
a very sort of light-hearted I guess introduction
to the tropical calculus it's very much sort of
geared towards the applications that I'm kind of
interested in here which are two data structures
and in particular the role of multis it's so you
know if you look up max bus algebra minimax
algebra you will find many other directions
that people go in this is not sort of the primary
direction but I think it's a nice kind of amusing
and more than amusing it's sort of instructive
to think differently about such very fundamental
things as the basic operations of arithmetic
different ways of realizing and thinking about
them so in our next video we're going to look more
carefully at this principle of inclusion exclusion
which is actually a very fundamental law in set
theory in fact it's one of the pillars of set
theory law with wide application and we're going
to prove it but we're also going to formulate it
in a more general fashion than usual so one of the
themes that I'm pushing here a little bit is that
we don't just have set theory we actually have
lom's lists order sets multi sets and sets and
for many purposes multi sets have really been
not given their proper due so we're gonna see
that thinking about things in terms of multi sets
rather more generally than just sets allows us to
understand the principle of inclusion exclusion
I think in a deeper in a more fundamental way
than the usual way so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberrger thanks for listening